PURPOSE

This code calculates the NERCOME estimate of covariance, following Lam (2016), Ann. Stat., 44, 928, and its inverse for a given set of realisations of a data vector. For details about this NERCOME implementation and its parameters see Joachimi (2016), MNRAS, 
http://mnrasl.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2016/11/30/mnrasl.slw240.abstract?keytype=ref&ijkey=hooTrFIJQrWNaxK



TERMS OF USE

This code employs the GNU Scientific Library and can be used, modified, and re-distributed under the conditions of the GNU General Public Licence:

https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html

The code was written in the hope to be of use, but comes without any warranty.

If you use this code or any direct derivatives thereof for your research, please cite Joachimi (2016).



COMPILATION

The code depends on the GSL library. If it is not in a standard path, the base path to the GSL library and header files should be provided via the LFLAG and IFLAG variables respectively in the Makefile.

Then type

make cov_shrink

The code has been tested with gcc version 5.4.0 and GSL versions 2.2.1.



PARAMETER FILE

An example parameter file is provided in cov_shrink_default.param. The following entries must be present in the correct order:

1. path to the directory where files are read and written
2. file name of the input data file (put '-' if using internally generated iid Gaussian distributed mock data)
3. output file identifier string
4. dimension of input data vector
5. number of realisations of input data vector
6. number of split locations to probe for NERCEOME estimator (set to 1 for fixed split at 2/3 of the number of realisations)
7. number of samples to average over in NERCOME
8. file with normalisation vector (put '-' for unit normalisation)

Comments can be added after the '#' sign, after keywords on the same line or on separate lines.



INPUT FILES

nd: size of data vector
nr: number of realisations of input data vector

1. data vector realisations

   ascii file containing columns with realisations of data vectors of size nd, with a total of nr columns

2. normalisation of data vector

   ascii file containing one column of size nd with the normalisation of data vector element i in row i



RUNNING THE CODE

Type

./cov_shrink

to see the command line options, which here is a single argument provided the full path to the parameter file.

For convenience, a simple bash wrapper script is provided that demonstrates the usage of the code; see cov_shrink_wrapper.sh. To execute the script, make sure the file is executable and type

./cov_shrink_wrapper.sh

The main parameters are set in the parameter file. Some additional control of the way the NERCOME estimator is calculated is possible via the COMB_MIN, COMB_THRESHOLD, and AVOID_FRAC define statements at the top of cov_shrink.c. See the comments and the paper for details. The define statement GENERATE_TYPE statement can be modified to change the correlation structure of the internally generated data vector. You will need to recompile after changing these statements. If you wish to vary the random seed used to generate the mock data vector, set the GSL environment variable GSL_RNG_SEED to a value different from zero in the terminal from which the code is called.



OUTPUT FILES

nd: size of data vector

1. sample covariance and inverse

   ascii files written in matrix format, with nd x nd entries; not written if matrix not invertible

2. NERCOME covariance and inverse

   ascii files written in matrix format, with nd x nd entries; not written if matrix not invertible

3. covariance eigenvalues

   for both the sample and NERCOME covariance estimates
   ascii files with a single line starting with the number of realisations, followed by nd entries of the matrix eigenvalues in non-increasing sequence

4. NERCOME split location

   ascii file with a single line starting with the number of realisations, followed by the optimal location of the split in the number of data vector realisations



BUGS

Please report any bugs to b.joachimi [at] ucl.ac.uk.
